PATROL GUIDE
Section: Duties and Responsibilities
Procedure No:
202-01
POLICE OFFICER
DATE EFFECTIVE:
LAST REVISION:
PAGE:
11/16/22
I.O. 112
1 of 2

POLICE
OFFICER
1.
Perform duty in uniform as indicated on roll call or as directed by
competent authority.
2.
Monitor portable radio
a.
Obtain a portable radio from desk officer, if assigned radio is defective.
3.
Proceed to post, sector or assignment as directed by supervisor.
a.
Do not congregate, or engage in unnecessary conversation, with
other members of the service while on post, absent police
necessity.
4.
Comply with meal and post relieving points as directed by commanding officer.
5.
Report to desk officer when entering or leaving stationhouse/police service
area/transit district during tour of duty indicating reason for presence therein.
6.
Be aware of, and inspect, post or sector for conditions requiring police attention.
7.
Report immediately to the patrol supervisor and the platoon commander
any unusual crime, occurrence or condition.
8.
Report conditions not requiring immediate attention to the telephone
switchboard operator.
9.
Render all necessary police service in assigned area and as otherwise
directed.
10.
Familiarize self with the everyday routine of people residing, doing
business or frequenting post or sector.
11.
Investigate suspicious conditions and circumstances on the post.
12.
Give attention to crime hazards.
13.
When dispatched to an assignment by the telephone switchboard operator,
keep the telephone switchboard operator informed of police services rendered.
14.
Report police services rendered in another command to desk officer of
that command.
15.
Call the desk officer when detained at court or elsewhere and unable to
return to command at scheduled end of tour.
16.
Maintain digital Activity Log.
17.
Preserve completed ACTIVITY LOGS (PD112-145) and produce them
as required by competent authority.
18.
Do not leave post/sector until meal actually commences and be back on
post when meal is over. (Travel time is not authorized).
19.
When assigned as a steady sector officer in a Neighborhood Policing
command:
a.
Perform duty in uniform as permanently assigned member of
sector car.
b.
Adhere to P.G. 202-02, “Radio Motor Patrol Operator,” or P.G. 202-03,
“Radio Motor Patrol Recorder,” depending on assignment of the day.
c.
Respond to calls for service in assigned sector.
d.
Address conditions of mutual importance in assigned sector, as
appropriate, when notified by neighborhood coordination officer.
e.
Participate in community meetings in assigned sector.
PATROL GUIDE
PROCEDURE NUMBER:
DATE EFFECTIVE:
LAST REVISION:
PAGE:
202-01
11/16/22
I.O. 112
2 of 2

POLICE
OFFICER
(continued)
f.
When not assigned to calls for service, utilize uncommitted time to
assist neighborhood coordination officers in implementing strategies to
address crime and order maintenance problems within assigned sector.
NOTE
Uncommitted time is utilized by steady sector officers to engage the community,
participate in community meetings, address conditions, and conduct enforcement
operations. Uncommitted time consists of approximately two hours and forty minutes, or
one-third of an eight hour tour, to be taken by steady sector officers as conditions
dictate, in one or more blocks of time.
g.
Notify Communications Section radio dispatcher utilizing radio code
signal 10-75C for community visits and radio code signal 10-75D
when addressing sector conditions and make detailed digital
Activity Log entries to initiate uncommitted time.
h.
Be knowledgeable about crime conditions, community issues, and
resources in assigned sector.
i.
Obtain sector crime information from precinct crime analysis
personnel weekly and as needed.
j.
Review crime analysis reports and become well-versed in crime
patterns and trends within assigned sector, with the assistance of
precinct crime analysis personnel.
k.
Utilize the OFFICER SELF-REPORT FORM on the Craft
application to report achievements in crime prevention, problem-
solving, community engagement, etc.
NOTE
Steady sector officers will not be utilized as backfill for other precinct assignments (i.e.,
shooting posts, prisoner transports, hospital posts, etc.).
Steady sector officers will not be assigned to details during regularly-scheduled tours of
duty without permission of the Bureau Chief concerned, the Chief of Department or the
Police Commissioner.
20.
When assigned as a response officer in a Neighborhood Policing command:
a.
Perform duty in uniform.
b.
Adhere to P.G. 202-02, “Radio Motor Patrol Operator,” or P.G. 202-03,
“Radio Motor Patrol Recorder,” depending on assignment of the day.
c.
When assigned to response car, patrol as determined by platoon
commander or other competent authority.
d.
Answer calls for service so that steady sector officers can engage
in uncommitted time.
e.
Provide back-up for and assist sector cars, when necessary.