PATROL GUIDE
Section: Duties and Responsibilities
Procedure No:
202-02
RADIO MOTOR PATROL OPERATOR
DATE EFFECTIVE:
LAST REVISION:
PAGE:
11/16/22
I.O. 112
1 of 2

RADIO MOTOR
PATROL
OPERATOR
1.
Inspect the serviceability of seatbelts in the radio motor patrol car.
a.
Notify patrol supervisor of any deficiencies found in accordance
with P.G. 219-01, “Inspection of Department Vehicles Each Tour
by Operator.”
2.
Wear safety belts.
a.
Wear three-point safety belts, when provided.
b.
Wear two-point safety belts (lap belts) if three-point safety belts
are not provided.
c.
Use safety belt extender when three-point safety belt becomes
difficult to engage due to space constraints.
NOTE
There is an increased risk of significant injury to members of the service who do not
wear safety belts. There is no question that wearing a safety belt when involved in a
motor vehicle collision reduces the extent and severity of injuries and saves lives.
Therefore, the wearing of safety belts is required for all individuals operating or riding
in a Department vehicle (marked or unmarked) or a private vehicle authorized for
Department use. Safety belts may be removed only when a member of the service is
involved in what appears to be a dangerous tactical situation and the wearing of the
safety belt may impair the member’s ability to take police action.
3.
Inspect Ballistic Window Inserts and Window Insert Wedges for proper
installation and damage, if vehicle is so equipped.
a.
Immediately report deficiencies to the patrol supervisor.
4.
Operate car for the entire tour when assigned as driver of ranking officer.
a.
Monitor radio messages directed to assigned area when supervisor
is out of car.
5.
Permit only uniformed members of the service performing related police
duty to enter or ride in a radio motor patrol car on patrol.
6.
Respond to messages of serious police emergency within five blocks of
location even if messages are directed to another car, regardless of sector,
precinct and borough boundaries.
7.
Do not carry electric blasting caps in vehicles or transmit within 150 feet
of any electric blasting operation.
8.
Leave radio on and have the car ready for instant use when car is being
cleaned or supplied with fuel.
a.
Do not put car out of service if fuel is to be obtained in assigned
command.
9.
Avoid remaining in areas where radio reception is poor.
10.
Proceed to an emergency scene with due caution. (Do not use the siren
unnecessarily; approach the scene of a reported crime quietly).
11.
Take RMP car out of assigned sector when:
a.
Directed by competent authority, or
b.
Answering an emergency call, or
PATROL GUIDE
PROCEDURE NUMBER:
DATE EFFECTIVE:
LAST REVISION:
PAGE:
202-02
11/16/22
I.O. 112
2 of 2

RADIO MOTOR
PATROL
OPERATOR
(continued)
c.
Servicing, repairing or cleaning required, with permission of desk
officer.
12.
Constantly patrol assigned sector.
13.
Do not unnecessarily leave the car unattended.
a.
Remove keys and lock car when answering call.
b.
Do not leave portable radio in car.
14.
Position car at scene of an emergency to avoid obstructing, or being
blocked by, emergency apparatus.
15.
Comply with A.G. 322-20, “Attendance Application Guidelines” when
reporting for tour of duty and at completion of tour.
16.
Perform the duties of recorder when none is assigned.
17.
Inspect the car when reporting for duty (see P.G. 219-01, “Inspection of
Department Vehicles Each Tour by Operator”).
18.
Make digital Activity Log entry of findings, odometer reading and
amount of gasoline in the tank as registered by the indicator, in addition
to all other required entries as per P.G. 212-08, “Activity Logs.”
19.
Notify the desk officer when a car requires speedometer repairs or other
repairs or replacement of parts or accessories, including tires and tubes.
20.
Operate car in manner to avoid injury to person or damage to property.
21.
Drive at slow rate of speed except under exceptional circumstances or
extreme emergency.
22.
Operate RMP car only when assigned and only when Department
qualified to operate such vehicle.
23.
Take care of car and accessories, equipment and tools assigned.
24.
Cooperate with other operators of same car to which assigned in care and
maintenance, particularly cleaning, washing and keeping the car in proper
operating condition.
25.
Make minor repairs to car when possible.
26.
Enter appointment for preventive maintenance on sticker affixed to vehicle.
27.
Deliver car for regular preventive maintenance inspection as scheduled on
sticker affixed to vehicle.
28.
Do not tow or push another vehicle with RMP car.
NOTE
Highway District vehicles equipped with “protective bumper guards” may push disabled
vehicles obstructing active traffic lanes to the nearest location where it may be parked
safely. In NO event will disabled vehicles be pushed to repair shops or onto private
property (see P.G. 214-31, “Removal of Vehicles From Parkways, Highways and
Expressways”).